BITCOIN and BLOCKCHAINS
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Blockchains are cryptographic technologies that underly Bitcoin and can
be used for applications beyond confirming currency transactions.  It
offers a way for people who do not know each other or trust each other
to create a record chain of title of almost anything and compels the
assent of each party.

Also known generically as a "distributed ledger."

For a non-Bitcoin example, see the Ethereum blockchain and the DAO
contract using it (and how it blew up.)

Usually, a trusted third party, like a bank who processes checks, is
used in financial transactions.  The blockchain replaces the trusted
third party.  For example, as to Bitcoin, a distributed database 
contains the proof of who owns what at any point in time.  This
distributed ledger is replicated on thousands of world-wide computers
called nodes.

When A wants to transfer BTC to B, each needs a wallet - software which
accesses the blockchain.  No personal identification is used, only an
"account" number.

A initiates the transfer, and miners (special nodes) go through some
steps to confirm that A has the BTC she wishes to transfer:

    -this transfer is aggregated with many other proposed transfers into
a proposed "block;"
    -the proposed block goes through some mechanations and a hash is
produced, which hash also identifies the previous block in the chain;
    -the miners then all try to solve the hash, i.e., to produce a
"proof-of-work;"
    -the proof-of-work is then propogated to all the other nodes and
miners who can then verify the new block.

Some explanations:

The miners get paid two ways:  on a sliding scale from an initial 50 BTC
in 2008, halving every four years; May 2012 was at 25; later this year
will halve to 12.5, etc;  they also get a fee or commission, which is
optional and comes from each specific transaction.  Miners can choose,
to some degree, which transactions to include in a block, so there is an
incentive to pay a small fee.

A proof-of-work is not really explained in sufficient detail anywhere
I've found, but basically, the proof-of-work requires miners to find a
nonce such that when the block content is hashed along with the nonce,
the result is numerically smaller than the Bitcoin network's (i.e., the
software's) "difficulty target."  The difficulty target is adjusted each
2016 blocks to keep the average time between new blocks to 10 minutes.
Interesting:  the number of nonces that must be tried, on average, is
presently over 250 quintillion.  The definition of proof-of-work is "a
piece of data which is difficult to produce but easy to verify."

EXAMPLE:

Say the base string to work on is "Hello World."  (In real life, it
would be a hash of the proposed block.)  The target is to find a
variation of "Hello World" that hashes to a value beginning with '000.'
For example, a sha1sum hash of .xinitrc is 
0a5d806c7d022d2c479b2e485e73d6c16f078dc1, so we want to add a nonce
(starting with 1, 2, 3...) such that the sha2sum starts with "000."

So there are still some questions like where (who produces) the hash,
etc., but this is a start.

Can buy bitcoins on an exchange, get some in a transaction, etc.
